Testing documentation (#414)
jvalue/jayvee: apps/docs/docs/dev/12-jayvee-testing.md

---
title: Writing tests for Jayvee
---

In order to ensure that Jayvee functions correctly a number of tests have been written already.  

> Additionally a few testing utils have been implemented to help writing tests and especially to avoid having to create Langium Typescript objects by hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we implemented a few testing utils to avoid creating Langium Typescript objects by hand.
```

> It has to be mentioned that, like Jayvee itself, the tests are split into grammar and execution tests.

Reviewer: Rather make a list of different types of tests?

Author: What exactly do you mean with that?

Reviewer: I mean that the paragraph is quite lengthy to read. I'd prefer a bullet list, sth like this:
```
We implemented the following components for regressionion testing:
- Testing utils: utils to create Langium TypeScript objects by hand
- Grammar tests: test the grammar parsing and validation
- Execution tests: test the execution of blocks
```
And each bullet point could link to the subsection headings below (like a table of contents).

TODO
- Describe what tests exist
- Describe what kind of test utils exist (and how to use them)
- Describe location of test .jv files

> - CREATE GITHUB ISSUES FOR MISSING TESTS

Reviewer: TODOs

## Conventions
All of the existing tests follow these conventions:

> 1. The `<file-name>.spec.ts` file is located next to the `<file-name>.ts` file itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The `<file-name>.spec.ts` file is located next to the `<file-name>.ts` file itself.
```

> 2. The `*.jv` assets are located inside a `test/assets/<file-name>` folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The `*.jv` assets are located inside a `test/assets/<file-name>` folder.
```

> For more details take a look at one of the exisiting tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a look at one of the exisiting tests for more details.
```

## Grammar tests
These kind of tests are mainly located inside the [language-server](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/language-server) as well as the language parts of each extension (for example [std/lang](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/extensions/std/lang)).

### Testing utils

> The testing utils are located inside the `language-server` inside the [test folder](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/language-server/src/test).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The testing utils are located inside the `language-server` in a dedicated [test folder](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/language-server/src/test).  
```

These utils can be imported using `@jvalue/jayvee-language-server/test` and contain the following parts:

[**langium-utils.ts**](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/blob/main/libs/language-server/src/test/langium-utils.ts):  

> This utils file contains two functions: `parseHelper` and `validationHelper`.  
> Both of them expect the content of a *.jv file as their input.  
> The first function simply parses the input and returns the corresponding `LangiumDocument` while the second function also tries to validate the created document.  
> Both of them were copied from the langium repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This utils file contains two functions: 
- `parseHelper` to simplify parsing the input and returning the corresponding `LangiumDocument`, and 
- `validationHelper` validate the created document.  
```

[**utils.ts**](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/blob/main/libs/language-server/src/test/utils.ts):  

> This file contains the non-copied utils functions, like a function `readJvTestAssetHelper` for reading jv test assets. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file contains custom testing utility functions, like `readJvTestAssetHelper` for reading jv test assets. 
```

> Combined with the `langium-utils.ts#parseHelper` function the following can be used to easily convert `*.jv` test assets to their `LangiumDocument`s:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Example:**
```

import { createJayveeServices } from '@jvalue/jayvee-language-server';
import {
  ParseHelperOptions,
  expectNoParserAndLexerErrors,
  parseHelper,
  readJvTestAssetHelper,
} from '@jvalue/jayvee-language-server/test';
import { AstNode, LangiumDocument } from 'langium';

describe('My example test', () => {
  let parse: (
    input: string,
    options?: ParseHelperOptions,
  ) => Promise<LangiumDocument<AstNode>>;

  const readJvTestAsset = readJvTestAssetHelper(
    __dirname,
    '../../test/assets/', // localized path to test assets folder
  );

  beforeAll(() => {
    // [...] register extensions etc
    const services = createJayveeServices(NodeFileSystem).Jayvee; // Or retrieve them if services already exist
    // Parse function for Jayvee (without validation)
    parse = parseHelper(services);
  });

  // [...]

  it('My dummy test', () => {
    const text = readJvTestAsset('<sub-folder>/<test-asset-name>.jv');

    const document = await parse(text);
    expectNoParserAndLexerErrors(document);
    // Rest of test
  });
});
```
If you want to simply validate the test assets, simply replace `parseHelper` with `validationHelper` (and adjust the types).  

> For more information about this function, as well as all the others, please take a look at the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find detailed documentation of all the utility functions directly in the code.
```

[**extension/**](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/language-server/src/test/extension):  

> This folder contains an extension for testing. If there are certain blocks required for testing a certain feature, they can be defined here. One such example is the already defined `TestProperty` block which has a multitude of different properties, each with a different type. This block is used for testing properties and property-assignments.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This folder contains a Jayvee extension for testing. 
If there are certain blocks required for testing a certain feature, they can be defined here. 
One such example is the already defined `TestProperty` block which has a multitude of different properties, each with a different type. 
This block is used for testing properties and property-assignments.  
```

> The extension also already provides simple (meaning they don't have any properties) loader and extractor blocks for all IOTypes. These blocks are automatically generated at runtime with the following naming scheme: `Test${ioType}${io === 'input' ? 'Loader' : 'Extractor'}` (Example: `TestFileExtractor`).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension provides loader and extractor blocks for all IOTypes without any properties.
These blocks are automatically generated at runtime with the following naming scheme: `Test${ioType}${io === 'input' ? 'Loader' : 'Extractor'}` (Example: `TestFileExtractor`).  
```

This allows for easy (grammar) testing of non loader/extractor blocks:
``` jv
pipeline Pipeline {

>   block Test oftype CellWriter {
>     at: range A1:A3;
>     write: ['values', 'to', 'write'];
>   }
> 
>   block TestExtractor oftype TestSheetExtractor {
>   }
> 
>   block TestLoader oftype TestSheetLoader {
>   }
> 
>   TestExtractor -> Test -> TestLoader;
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  TestExtractor -> BlockUnderTest -> TestLoader;
  
  block BlockUnderTest oftype CellWriter {
    at: range A1:A3;
    write: ['values', 'to', 'write'];
  }

  block TestExtractor oftype TestSheetExtractor {  }
  block TestLoader oftype TestSheetLoader { }
}
```

```

### Existing tests
Currently there are already tests for the following parts:
- Language-server validation checks (located [here](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/language-server/src/lib/validation))
- Language-server constraint validation (located [here](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/dev/libs/language-server/src/lib/constraint))
- Custom block (property) validation of the three existing extensions (std extension located [here](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/blob/dev/libs/extensions/std/lang/src))
- Grammar validation tests for all official full examples from the [/example](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/example) folder (located [here](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/blob/dev/libs/extensions/std/lang/src/example-validation.spec.ts))

> - Grammar validation tests for all block examples of the std extension (located [here](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/blob/dev/libs/extensions/std/lang/src/meta-inf-example-validation.spec.ts))

Reviewer: Not sure if we need such a list? Seems high maintenance for me.

Author: Yeah, but I think you mentioned that I should somehow/somewhere document what tests already exist

Reviewer: Fair enough, let's keep them.

## Execution tests

> These kind of tests are mainly located inside the [interpreter](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/language-server), its [interpreter-lib](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/dev/libs/interpreter-lib), the [execution lib](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/dev/libs/execution) as well as the execution parts of each extension (for example [std/exec](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/extensions/std/exec)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These kind of tests are mainly located inside the [interpreter](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/language-server), the [interpreter-lib](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/dev/libs/interpreter-lib), the [execution lib](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/dev/libs/execution) as well as the execution parts of each extension (for example [std/exec](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/main/libs/extensions/std/exec)).
```

### Testing utils
The testing utils for execution tests are spread between the extensions, with the interfaces and base utils located inside the [execution lib](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/dev/libs/execution).  
They can be imported using `@jvalue/jayvee-extensions/rdbms/test`, `@jvalue/jayvee-extensions/std/test` and `@jvalue/jayvee-execution/test`.

[**utils.ts**](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/blob/dev/libs/execution/test/utils.ts):  

> At the moment this only contains two functions: `clearBlockExecutorRegistry` and `clearConstraintExecutorRegistry`. These are used to clear the corresponding registries between tests, in case the tested method initializes Jayvee itself (see [smoke test](#existing-tests-1)).

Reviewer: Make it bullet points pls

[**block-executor-mocks.ts**](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/blob/dev/libs/execution/test/block-executor-mock.ts):  
`BlockExecutorMock` interface for defining mocks for `AbstractBlockExecutor`. Generally only loader and executor blocks require mocks, because they interact with "the outside world" (i.e. `HttpExtractor` making http calls).  
Due to how vastly different each `BlockExecutor` can be, this interface is very simple, containing only a `setup(...args: unknown[])` and a `restore()` method. See below for existing implementations.

[**rdbms/exec/test**](https://github.com/jvalue/jayvee/tree/dev/libs/extensions/rdbms/exec/test):  
Contains the implementation of `BlockExecutorMock` for `PostgresLoaderExecutor` and `SQLiteLoaderExecutor`.  

> Both of these executors are mocked using `jest.mock` to mock the corresponding libraries (`pg` and `sqlite3`) (**Note:** This part has to be added to the top of each `*.spec.ts` file (see usage below) due to how `jest.mock` works).  

Reviewer: Rather make it a comment in the code.

Author: I am guessing you mean
> **Note:** This part has to be added to the top of each `*.spec.ts` file (see usage below) due to how `jest.mock` works

and that I should add this in the code example below?

Author: If I am right, I choose to put it here, because I honestly could not come up with a wording that would not sound completely strange as a comment

Reviewer: Sth like this?
```
// Global mocking of external library required, even though the mocking is encapsulated in helper classes
```
